# Leveraging camera traps and artificial intelligence to explore thermoregulation behaviour

_Ben Shermeister, Danny Mor, and Ofir Levy_

### Please contact Ofir Levy (levyofir@tauex.tau.ac.il) about the code or data

### **Abstract**:
1. Behavioural thermoregulation has critical ecological and physiological consequences that profoundly influence individual fitness and species distributions, particularly in the context of climate change. However, field monitoring of this behaviour remains labour-intensive and time-consuming. With the rise of camera-based surveys and Artificial Intelligence (AI) approaches in computer vision, we should try to build better tools for characterising animals' behavioural thermoregulation.  

2. In this study, we developed a deep learning framework to automate the detection and classification of thermoregulation behaviour. We used lizards, the Rough-tail rock agama (\textit{Laudakia vulgaris}), as a model animal for thermoregulation. We colour-marked the lizards and curated a diverse dataset of images captured by trail cameras under semi-natural conditions. Subsequently, we trained an object-detection model to identify lizards and image-classification models to determine their microclimate usage (activity in sun or shade), which may indicate thermoregulation preferences. We then evaluated the performance of each model and analyzed how the classification of thermoregulating lizards performed under different solar conditions (sun or shade), times of day, and marking colours.

3. Our framework's models achieved high scores in several performance metrics. The thermoregulation classification model performed significantly better on sun-basking lizards, achieving the highest classification accuracy with white-marked lizards. Moreover, the hours of activity and the microclimate choices (sun vs shade-seeking behaviour) of lizards, generated by our framework, are closely aligned with manually annotated data.

4. Our study underscores the potential of AI in effectively tracking behavioural thermoregulation, offering a promising new direction for camera trap studies. This approach can potentially reduce the labour and time associated with ecological data collection and analysis and can help gain a deeper understanding of species' thermal preferences and risks of climate change on species behaviour.

# **Repository Directory**:
## See the following subdirectory for data and metadata: [link](https://github.com/levyofi/Shermeister_et_al_J_Anim_Ecol/tree/for_review/Data).

## See the following subdirectory for codes: [link](https://github.com/levyofi/Shermeister_et_al_J_Anim_Ecol/tree/for_review/Code).
